                   Do the Thing & Be the Bridge: 2025 – 2030
                           Lone Star College System Strategic Plan
                                Chancellor Mario K. Castillo, J.D.


       The Lone Star College System exists to offer transformational educational
opportunities that help individuals get from where they are to where they want to be.
The simple yet profound promise guides everything we do as a team. Our communities
look to us not only as an access point to higher education but as a bridge linking ambition
to achievement, learning to livelihood, and potential to prosperity.

       We are positioned to lead higher education as one of the largest community
colleges systems in the country—but we must get it right for others to follow. Similarly,
our responsibility does not end at learning outcomes alone. We must strengthen a culture
that invests in the people we expect to become deeply invested in our students—our
employees. As an institution we must ensure that our employees earn equitable and
competitive wages, opportunities for growth, and a workplace culture rooted in respect,
collaboration, and communication.

        Some challenges ahead are clear. Shifting demographics, approaching enrollment
cliffs, increasingly rapid evolution of workplace needs, the expectation that higher
education institutions do more with less, and the demand for holistic student support
services will require more thoughtful, intentional planning. At the same time an
increasingly unpredictable world demands financial resilience to sustain the promise of
an affordable, high-quality education for all. We cannot predict the future, but we can
build the tools now to mitigate risk and maximize opportunity.

       At Lone Star College we will Do the Thing: build bridges, open doors, remove
barriers, and ensure that opportunity exists for everyone that is willing to work for it.
Together we will foster financial resilience that creates more opportunity to reward and
retain both our employees and our students, lead academic excellence that spans both
classrooms and wraparound support, build a culture of communication and growth for
our employees, and erect bridges that connect students to gainful employment and
successful university transfer.

        Many higher education institutions are stretched thin with too many initiatives
and a lack of focus. Those institutions are doing “all the things” hoping something works.
I recommend a different approach. An approach that does not hope but one that plans,
that first tests and validates ideas before operationalizing them, and one that does not



                                            1
just germinate them and indiscriminately implements everything.           If everything is
important, nothing is.

       I do not recommend we “do all the things” because that will just lead to a lack of
strategic and operational focus as an institution, poor fiscal stewardship, and almost
certain employee burnout and low morale. Instead of doing “all the things,” I
recommend we figure out what “the Thing” is that works, and then we get this entire
institution, seven thousand strong, to “Do the Thing” exceptionally well.

    I invite us to coalesce around four strategic goals over the next five years. We will be
an extraordinary institution because we will do the ordinary extraordinarily well. There
are no novel ideas here—that’s why it is going to work. We will have four goals, our four
Gs, that will guide the next five years. No gimmicks, no quick fixes, no coming calvary,
just us, our hearts, talents, and treasures combined with a desire to leave this institution
better than we found it:

   •   G1:    Opportunity in Financial Resilience.
   •   G2:    Leadership in Academic Excellence.
   •   G3:    Strength in Culture and Talent Development.
   •   G4:    Connections to Bridges of Prosperity.
We are One Lone Star College. We will find opportunities in our financial resilience, lead
in academic excellence, strengthen ourselves in culture and talent development, and
connect ourselves to the future through bridges of prosperity. At the “G” level these
strategic priorities will move the College toward its vision through its mission. The
“Vision Statement” should not sleep in the Lone Star College Policy Manual only to
awaken for passive reference in marketing materials. Everything we do as a system
should get us closer to realizing the Vision. The new Vision Statement as of September
2025 reads:

       The System will lead higher education in offering high-quality,
       affordable education while consistently evolving to meet the
       community’s needs in academic and workforce education.

Similarly, the way to this Vision is through the new Mission Statement. The new Mission
Statement as of September 2025 reads:

       The System provides transformational educational opportunities that
       help individuals get from where they are to where they want to be.

                                             2
        Our logo, the Star of Tomorrow, “symbolizes the many facets that make Lone Star
College a truly unique source of opportunity for the regional Houston community. The
star, rather than being one solid stroke, is a collection of incomplete lines. Its structure
echoes our forming students who are, themselves, works in progress. The open design
of the star also represents our welcoming spirit to all seeking to improve their lives, while
hinting at Lone Star College System’s potential to grow with the community. The arc
dramatically bisecting the star illustrates our dynamic role in connecting students to the
future by bridging the education and employment gap as well as our ability to link
students to our colleges through distance learning. The Lone Star College Star of
Tomorrow reflects who we are, what we will become, and our commitment to helping
each student achieve a brighter tomorrow.” These words are from nearly 20 years ago
when our logo first appeared. We will honor the past, but we must continue to move
forward.

        We must acknowledge that the world outside of our institution is changing and
that we must change with it. We must honor the past, yes, but we must build for the
present and the future. The world is increasingly unpredictable. But unpredictability is
not necessarily, if we plan for it, a bad thing. The future can sometimes be unpredictably
bad, but it can also be unpredictably good. The best course then compels us to become a
resilient institution built to adapt.

                                              I.

       First, we must ensure financial order. We must have discipline today to enjoy
freedom tomorrow. Conversely, we are not a bank, and our goal is not simply to
accumulate assets for the sake of accumulating assets. We must balance fiscal
stewardship with being a mission-oriented enterprise that does the thing we were
created, funded, and entrusted to do. If we have considerable reserves but underfund
key operations in the name of fiscal stewardship, our students, faculty, and staff suffer.

        Likewise, too often those of us entrusted with fiscal stewardship believe that the
stewardship itself is the end goal, but it is not. The fiscal responsibility and
accountability, a key strategic guidepost for the past 10 years, we practice must serve
something. We have spent the past 10 years building up reserves, and thanks to those
efforts, in 2025 – 2030 we can now commit to moving forward with the safety and security
we all inherited from the efforts and sacrifices of the past. The new mission clarifies that
it must be in the service of “helping individuals get from where they are to where they
want to be.” The question then becomes in service of what or whom.



                                             3
       I believe investing in someone is always superior to investing in something. Most
of the people that work at this institution are here to pour into people, not processes,
software, or the latest initiative. More strategically, I believe that initiatives, best practices,
programs, and ideas come and go. A brilliant idea 20, 10, 5, or even a year ago will not
be a brilliant idea next year, in the next decade, or in the next century. Nevertheless, the
constant in all those acts are the actors, the people, that staff those initiatives, best
practices, programs, and ideas. Best practices, initiatives, and programs can be copied
but the people that implement those things successfully often cannot. Logically then we
must invest in the people over the processes, people over programs, and people over
practices.

       People then will be our competitive advantage because the types of help the
College offers will change with the times, but it is always the people that make up an
enterprise that define its success. In our case, the System does not help anyone—the
people that work and learn in the System are the actors that “help individuals get from
where they are to where they want to be.” Financial responsibility and accountability
must therefore be in the service of helping the individuals that comprise the System. I
therefore have set G1 as follows:

       G1: Opportunity in Financial Resilience. Enhance financial stewardship
within the institution while ensuring that all employees — including administrative,
academic, and support personnel — receive a living wage or better, are compensated
competitively within the higher education sector, and benefit from improved job
security and stability.
       We must offer all employees a livable wage not only because it is the right thing
to do but because it is the strategically sound thing to do as well. We must also not stop
there. We must offer competitive wages and improved job security and stability for all
employees. I will bet on an employee that only has to work one job —here—
outperforming an employee that must work here and somewhere else to make ends meet.

       Every full-time job at Lone Star College should empower that employee to make
basic ends meet. Moreover, we cannot credibly ask community partners to pay our
graduates and alumni livable wages, and be a bridge to prosperity, if we do not pay our
own full-time employees a livable wage. We must do better to link institutional wealth
and financial stewardship with individual financial security for our employees.

       Financial accountability and responsibility must be in service of something or
someone. We must choose to center people first. If we take care of the people, the people
will take care of us. In an increasingly digital and artificial world, basic human decency


                                                4
and humanity will be a competitive advantage. Lone Star College wins whenever both of
our people win together: students and employees.

                                              II.

        Academic and workforce education stand on equal footing at this institution. The
College offers hundreds of programs. Traditionally, each pocket of this system has
focused on making its program the marquee program of the College. This is intuitive
and no one can be blamed for taking such an approach. It does, however, sacrifice one of
the largest competitive advantages we have: our size. For many strategies the College’s
size is a weakness or a risk, but our size can be leveraged in several strategies that no one
in the area, the state, or the country can replicate.

       We should be thoughtful about the lever we all pile onto to lift the institution to
new heights. Less small levers, more economies of scale, and a larger effect in improving
the institution. For most of our students the biggest lever, right now, is to get them to
come back from one semester to the next. And to be clear: this is not an enrollment
prerogative but instead we must understand that the classroom experience and the
extracurricular experience are equally important. It is not the faculty’s sole responsibility
any more than it is the student service’s staff’s sole responsibility—it is our collective
responsibility.

      This is not a clarion call for our student services, outreach, and recruitment
teammates to do more with less; it is a signal that help is on the way. It is a commitment
that we understand that getting students to come here and keeping them here long
enough to help them get from where they are to where they want to be is a collective
responsibility at this institution.

       Retention alone will not get us as an institution from where we are to where we
want to be anymore than it will do so for our students. Eventually, we will need to do
retention and something else “(Retention (Plus))” to create credit-hour velocity toward
graduation and then transfer or job placement. We need even more focus. We have
already made significant headway in the last couple of years on retaining more of our
students. I am proud of how far we have come in two years. What we need now is to
better understand the cause and effects of our various interventions. We cannot, and
should not, “do all the things.” We must learn to be selective, intentional, and mission-
oriented anew because it is “Do the Thing,” not “Do All the Things”.




                                             5
       G2: Leading in Academic Excellence. Advance academic excellence by
combining high-quality instruction with support that improves learning, completion,
transfer, and career outcomes.

                                                 III.

      We now have the benefit of two system-wide, all-employee engagement surveys
over the last three calendar years. The first occurred in 2023 and the second one is
currently under way now in 2025. There are, and now have been traditionally, about
twenty questions we ask all employees to complete. Employees also have an area to
provide anonymous comments for my personal review and for publication on our
website. The overall results of both surveys are promising with the System’s Net
Promoter Score dramatically improving over the past two years—we can still do better.

       And there are a couple of areas where it is clear we must do better. First, we must
communicate better with one another. For example, “effective communication occurs
within my department; effective communication occurs between my department and
other areas of Lone Star College; effective communication occurs between the Lone Star
College System and the campuses.” And even in a somewhat unrelated question, “The
employee experience is consistent across all Lone Star College locations,” as I write this
the system-wide results with about 1000 employee responses is 25.17 percent, “I do not
know.” Collectively, these results tell me we must be more intentional about all forms of
communication at this institution. Similarly, many of our employees report they do not
know what is expected of them and lack the resources to do what they believe they are
expected to do. Second, we must do better in developing as an organization, developing
our talent, and succession planning.

        Improving communication and talent development are imperatives we cannot
ignore. In a decentralized and decoupled organizational model like ours, information
becomes the gateway to success. A department, division, or college that does not
understand how to relay local information across its sister business units cannot leverage
– once again – one of our largest competitive advantages: our size. The same is true for
divisions that do not speak across the traditional silos or the colleges themselves.
Information must run up and down the organization and from side to side so that the
organization is not only aligned as to its internal operational goals but in how it responds
to the external environment. I fundamentally believe that our employees and teammates
want to Do the Thing, but not enough of them know what that looks like or what the
Thing really needs to be. The new G3 aims to strategically improve our internal
communications to ensure we are to remain nimble and agile as an organization.


                                             6
Similarly, we need to improve internal talent development and succession planning as
part of organizational development.

      G3: Culture and Talent Development. Enhance communication and talent
development to cultivate a culture of engagement and innovation.

                                            IV.

       We are here, fundamentally, not to serve ourselves but to serve a community need
and as our Vision Statement states we must be “consistently evolving to meet the
community’s needs in academic and workforce education.” And we achieve this vision
through the tail end of our mission statement, “helping individuals get from where they
are to where they want to be.” As our logo makes clear, we must be the bridge that helps
individuals get from where they are to where they want to be. We want to intentionally
build bridges, because from our logo to our vision statement, to our mission statement,
to that first paycheck, this is an institution whose mission is to connect. Too much is left
to chance under our current strategies and goals. There are two bridges to prosperity
that need our focus in the next five years: (1) gainful employment in high demand fields,
and (2) successful transfer to four-year institutions.

      G4: Connections to Bridges of Prosperity. Build bridges that connect
individuals to gainful employment and successful transfer opportunities.

       Over the past two academic years we have worked hard to create a database
containing our workforce programs that can be sorted by various criteria. The arrival of
HB8 and a new state funding model in 2023 demands a focused approach to these
programs as a financial and operational imperative for the College. As employees we
understand at Lone Star College that all full-time employees should earn a living wage
for a full week’s worth of work. This moral and strategic imperative cannot end within
our own employment ranks; it must expand to also include the students that entrust us
to do for them as we would do for ourselves and our families.

        We must be a bridge of prosperity for them as well. Every workforce graduate at
Lone Star College should earn a family-sustaining, livable wage. This will not be easy,
but it will be worth it if we truly want to deliver on the profound promise to our students
that: (1) if they enroll at LSC; (2) work hard; (3) graduate; and (4) get a job in the field,
they and their families will be better off having come through our doors.




                                             7
       The College will sell itself—not in radio waves, television, or social media
advertisements, but at family barbecues, dinner tables, game rooms, and everywhere else
our successful alumni interact with prospective students. The best advertisement is
delivering on the promise we make every student that comes through our doors: if you
do the work, we will help get you there.

       Similarly, the Lone Star College System is an access point to higher education for
other institutions for many students. We must ensure that those students that come to
our halls with dreams of four-year degrees, or even post graduate degrees, not only
transfer—but dominate to the point that other students at those universities wonder why
they did not start here to go there.

       We have a special opportunity in the next five years. People are no longer
traditional college students and therefore traditional paths are not for them. People are
starting to question if moving to another city, paying thousands of dollars, and probably
getting in massive student-loan debt is worth the exchange. We can jump into that gap
with the strong conviction that every instructional hour at our institution has greater
value to our students than the comparative cost. The economics are there. We have a
strong business model. We can compete if we believe we can compete. It is there for us
to capitalize if we just fully lean into it. Yes, this is a community college. Yes, we take
everyone. Yes, we do not care if you have a lot of money. No, we do not care if you are
not legacy. No, we do not care if this is your first, second, or third attempt at college.
You are here. We are here. Let’s Do the Thing.

       We have the once-in-a-generation opportunity to crush the so-called community
college stigma in the Lone Star College System. We will not lower the bar; we will not
believe our students cannot achieve. To lower academic standards signals to our students
that we do not believe in them. We will not have that. We will believe, and we will help
individuals get from where they want to be.

        It might be a lot of work, it might take longer than they would like, but if they are
willing to do the work, we will sail into the wind with them. The community college
“stigma” exists only in our minds, and only insofar as we do not adequately prepare our
students for their universities. We have the rare opportunity to objectively prove that
our students are just as bright, hardworking, and can keep up with anyone at any school.
And because of our size, we can do it at an unparalleled scale most community colleges
in the country can only dream of reaching. I invite you to join me in objectively proving
with transfer and university graduation rates that our students can be anything they set
out to be.

                                             8
                                      Conclusion

        At its heart, this plan is about people: students, employees, and the communities
we show up to serve every day. By uniting financial resilience with academic excellence,
talent development, and meaningful partnerships, we are building bridges to brighter
futures. Together, we will Do the Thing—link ambition to achievement, learning to
livelihood, and potential to prosperity—and fulfill our mission to help get individuals
from where they once were to where they once only dreamed of being. That is the
difference between making a living and making a difference. I believe every employee
can do both in the Lone Star College System, and our students and alumni will be better
for it.




                                           9
